Add `ap_float` Sample (#2)
wangdi4/oneAPI-samples: DirectProgramming/DPC++FPGA/Tutorials/Features/ac_types/ap_float/README.md

| Time to complete                  | 1 hour

## Purpose

This FPGA tutorial shows how to use the `ap_float` type with some simple examples and recommended best practices.

This data-type can be used in place of native floating point types to generate area efficient and optimized designs for the FPGA. For example, operations which do not utilize all of the bits the native types or desings which do not require all of the range and precision of native types are good candidates for replacement with the `ap_float` type.

This tutorial will present the following:
1. How to include the `ap_float` type and an overview of common `ap_float` use cases.
2. A Polynomial Sine Approximation example which illustrates how to trade off mathematical accuracy for lesser FPGA resource utilization.
3. Rounding Mode and native type to `ap_float` type conversion examples which describe various `ap_float` rounding modes and their effect on accuracy and FPGA resource utilization.

> 4. A Quadratic Equation Solver example which show cases explicit `ap_float` math functions and how they can be used to replace mathematical operators like `*, /, +` and `-` for better quality of results.

Author: ```suggestion
4. A Quadratic Equation Solver example which showcases explicit `ap_float` math functions and how they can be used to replace mathematical operators like `*, /, +` and `-` for better quality of results.
```

## Simple Code Example

An `ap_float` number can be defined as follows:

```cpp
ihc::ap_float<EW, MW> a;
```

> Here `EW` specifies the exponent width and `MW` specifies the mantissa width of the number. Optionally, another template parameter can be specified to set the rounding mode. For more details please refer to the section titled `Variable-Precision Integer and Floating-Point Support` in the Intel® oneAPI DPC++ FPGA Optimization Guide.

Author: refer to ac_datatyp_ref.pdf ?

To use this type in your code, you must include the following header:

```cpp
#include <sycl/ext/intel/ac_types/ap_float.hpp>
```

To use `ap_float` math functions, you must include the following header:

```cpp
#include <sycl/ext/intel/ac_types/ap_float_math.hpp>
```

> Additionally, you must use the flag `-qactypes` (Linux) / `/Qactypes` (Windows) in order to ensure that the headers are correctly included and that the compiler links against the necessary libraries for emulation support. Specify the flag to `dpcpp` if you are invoking `dpcpp` on the command line. The `CMake` file provided with this tutorial will do so automatically.

Author: ... for emulation support

You can easily convert your existing designs that use native floating-point types to use `ap_float`: simply switch the original type. For math functions, `ap_float` has the "ihc_" prefix, you can simply switch your math functions accordingly, e.g. `sin(x)` should be changed to `ihc_sin(x)` for `ap_float`.

After the migration, you can use the area report to examine the area improvement of your design. In general, the line structure of the area report does not change. For example, instead of seeing a `X bit floating-point multiply` on the old design, the source line for the changed design would show `fpga.vpfp.mul`. 

> You should confirm that the area used for the operation has indeed decreased from a Quartus compile. You should also make sure that the result of your design still meets your accuracy expectations through simulation.

Author: ... through simulation

However, `ap_float` types that have non-standard exponent and mantissa widths cannot be trivially converted from C++ native `float` or `double` literals. As a result, the construction of an `ap_float` type may sometimes require FPGA logic resources to round the native floating-point constant to the specified `ap_float`. This is called 'intermediate conversion'.
 
It is important to understand when the intermediate conversions can occur. Conversion does not only happen when you are explicitly casting numbers: it can also happen when you perform arithmetic operations using `ap_float` types with different precisions. Intermediate conversions are necessary because the operation needs to unify the types of the operands by promoting the less "dominant" types (types that have lower representable range). This is demonstrated by the kernel code in the function `TestConversionKernelA`.

### Converting Native Numbers to `ap_float` Numbers with Minimal FPGA Hardware Resources

There are a few ways to generate compile-time `ap_float` constants that do not require any hardware implementation:
 

>   1. Initializing `ap_float<8,23>` from `float` or `ap_float<11,52>` from `double` is just a direct bitwise copy (wires in RTL), so if the input `float`/`double` is a compile-time constant, the constructed `ap_float` is also a compile-time constant. You may want to extend these two types instead of the native `float` and `double` type if you want to use `ap_float` specific floating-point arithmetic controls (for example, the explicit binary operation presented in the section titled `ap_float_explicit_arithmetic`).

Author: You may want to extend these two types instead of the native `float` and `double` type if you want to use `ap_float` specific floating-point arithmetic controls (for example, the explicit binary operation presented in the section titled `ap_float_explicit_arithmetic`).
?

>   2. Converting from a constant to another `ap_float` that has rounding mode `FP_Round::ZERO` also results in a compile time constant. This rounding mode is also respected in a binary operation when promotion rounding is required. This is demonstrated by the kernel code in the function `TestConversionKernelB()`.

Author: promotion rounding

>   3. The `convert_to` method of an `ap_float` returns itself rounded to a different type, it accepts a rounding mode as either accurate and area-intensive `RNE` mode (rounds to nearest, tie breaks to even) or inaccurate and non area-intensive `RZERO` (truncate towards zero) mode. When using `RZERO`, the compiler will also be able to convert a constant at compile time. This conversion bypasses the original rounding mode of the `ap_float` type. It is demonstrated by the code in `ConversionKernelC`.

Author: ```suggestion
  3. The `convert_to` method of an `ap_float` returns itself rounded to a different type, it accepts a rounding mode as either accurate and area-intensive `RNE` mode (rounds to nearest, tie breaks to even) or inaccurate and non area-intensive `RZERO` (truncate towards zero) mode. When using `RZERO`, the compiler will also be able to convert a constant at compile time. This conversion bypasses the original rounding mode of the `ap_float` type. It is demonstrated by the code in the function `ConversionKernelC`.
```

## Using Explicit `ap_float` Math Functions in Place of Mathematical Operators

In C++ applications, the basic binary operations have little expressiveness. On the contrary, FPGAs implement these operations using configurable logic, so you can improve your design's performance by fine-tuning the floating-point operations since they are usually area and latency intensive.

The kernel code in the function `TestSpecializedQuadraticEqnSolver()` demonstrates how to use the explicit versions of `ap_float` binary operators to perform floating-point arithmetic operations based on your need.

You can fine-tune the floating-point arithmetic operations when you are multiplying numbers with different precisions and/or outputting the
result of the multiply with a different precision.

> You may also want to fine-tune arithmetic operations when you are not concerned about the accuracy of the operation, or when you expect your values to easily fall into the subnormal range and you do not wish to flush them to zero when that happens.

Author: ?

 
To address these use cases, `ap_float` provides an explicit version of binary operators using template functions. The explicit operators provide 3 more main features in addition to basic binary operators.
 
1. Allow inputs and outputs with different precisions in the multiplication.

2. Tweak the area and accuracy trade off of the binary operations.

>     The binary operations have high accuracy by default and produce results that are 0.5 ULP off from the most correct result. Users can override the default to choose an implementation with less area but also less precision (1 ULP).

Author: ULP

3. Turn on/off subnormal support in the binary operations.

    To save area, subnormal support in the binary operators default to auto, this means it would be off unless there is direct hardened DSP support for it. Users can turn it on when the computation is expected to produce values close to 0, with some additional area.

> The general form of explicit operations are as follows:

Author: put this ahead?

 
For addition, subtraction and division:
Syntax:

```

>   ap_float<E, M>::add/sub/div<AccuracyOption, SubnormalOption>(op1, op2)

Author: namespace ihc ?

```

Usage:

* Rounds `op1` and `op2` to the specified `E` (exponent) and `M` (mantissa) widths
* Implements the operation with the provided accuracy and subnormal options.
* Returns the result with type `ap_float<E, M>`
 
For multiplication:
Syntax:

```
  ap_float<E, M>::mul<AccuracyOption, SubnormalOption>(op1, op2)
```

Usage:

> * Leaves `op1` and `op2` intact

Author: what if `op1` and `op2` are not of the same type?

* Implements the operation with the provided accuracy and subnormal options.
* Returns the result with type `ap_float<E, M>`
 
The accuracy setting is optional and can be one of the `enum`s below:
```

>   ihc::fp_config::FP_Accuracy::HIGH

Author: difference?

  ihc::fp_config::FP_Accuracy::LOW
```
 
The subnormal setting is optional can be one of the `enum`s below:
```
  ihc::fp_config::FP_Subnormal::ON
  ihc::fp_config::FP_Subnormal::OFF
```

Note:
* Both `enum`s need to be compile time constants.
* You must specify the accuracy setting if you want to specify the subnormal setting.
 
After fine-tuning the operations, the overall structure of the area report would remain the same, but for each of the fine-tuned operation, you should see an area reduction on the same line if you have chosen to use the low accuracy variant of the operation, or an area increase if you decide to enable subnormal support on an operation.

### Code Example
This section of the tutorial corresponds to the kernels `SimpleQuadraticEqnSolverKernel` and `SpecializedQuadraticEqnSolverKernel`.
 
`SimpleQuadraticEqnSolverKernel` demonstrates a design that uses `ap_float` with arithmetic operators to compute the quadratic formula.

After you have successfully compiled the design, open 

> "part1_operator.prj/reports/report.html " and open the Area Analysis page.

Author: "part1_operator

Make sure you understand the resource utilization from each operation as we

> will compare the data to the second part of the tutorial.

Author: second part ?

     ```
     nmake fpga
     ``` 

*Note:* The Intel® PAC with Intel Arria® 10 GX FPGA and Intel® FPGA PAC D5005 (with Intel Stratix® 10 SX) do not yet support Windows*. Compiling to FPGA hardware on Windows* requires a third-party or custom Board Support Package (BSP) with Windows* support.<br>
*Note:* If you encounter any issues with long paths when compiling under Windows*, you may have to create your ‘build’ directory in a shorter path, for example c:\samples\build.  You can then run cmake from that directory, and provide cmake with the full path to your sample directory.
 
### In Third-Party Integrated Development Environments (IDEs)

You can compile and run this tutorial in the Eclipse* IDE (in Linux*) and the Visual Studio* IDE (in Windows*).
For instructions, refer to the following link: [Intel® oneAPI DPC++ FPGA Workflows on Third-Party IDEs](https://software.intel.com/en-us/articles/intel-oneapi-dpcpp-fpga-workflow-on-ide)

## Examining the Reports

Locate the pair of `report.html` files in either:

* **Report-only compile**:  `ap_float_report.prj`
* **FPGA hardware compile**: `ap_float.prj`

### Examining the Area Reports for the Sine Approximation Kernels

> Navigate to the "Area Analysis-> Area Analysis of System" page. Click on the `Kernel System` line to expand it.

Author: Report UI updated in 2022.3

Observe the difference in resource utilization of the kernels `ApproximateSineWithDouble` and `ApproximateSineWithAPFloat`.

Expand the lines with the kernel names by clicking on them and expand the sub hierarchies to observe how the `add, mult` and `div`
operations use lesser resources for the `ApproximateSineWithAPFloat` kernel.

> You should observe an area reduction in resource utilization of up to 30% for the binary operations.

Author: Is there a rough quantification for `ac_fixed`  improving resource utilization?

> TODO: Is simulation supported for customers yet?

Author: Remember to remove

> Open the "Throughput Analysis > Verification Statistics" page. You should observe around 15% percent latency reduction when using the `ap_float` type.

Author: No `Verification Statistics` in 2022.3

> You should also note that simulations indicate that the values computed for both designs are the same. This indicates that our original precision expectation is still satisfied.

Author: ?
